NOTE: The official merit badge pamphlets are now free and downloadable HERE or can be purchased at the Scout Shop.
1. Emergency Situations. Do the following:
(a) Discuss with your counselor the aspects of emergency preparedness and include in your discussion the kinds of questions that are important to ask yourself as you consider each of these: prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery.
Resource: 5 Steps of Disaster Risk Management (video)
(b) Using a chart, spreadsheet, or another method approved by your counselor, demonstrate your understanding of each aspect of emergency preparedness listed in requirement 1(a) (prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery) for 10 emergency situations from the list below. Discuss your findings with your counselor.
(1) Home stovetop or cooking fire
(2) Kitchen grease fire
(3) Home fireplace or chimney fire
(4) Household chemicals or hazardous materials spill or leak
(5) Flash flooding in your neighborhood or community
(6) Earthquake
(7) West Nile virus or other insect-borne infection
(8) Terrorist attack
(9) Tornado or hurricane
(10) Major snowstorm or ice storm
(11) Avalanche (snow or rock)
(12) Large-scale wildfire
(13) Blackout or other major utility failure
(14) Nuclear power plant emergency
(15) Biological or chemical agent spill or release
(16) Medical emergency
(17) Human-caused disaster
(18) Active shooter situation
(19) Cyberattack
(20) Pandemic
(21) Other emergency situation identified by your local or state government
(c) Meet with and teach your family how to get or build a kit, make a plan, and be informed for the situations you chose in requirement 1(b). Complete a family plan. Then meet with your counselor and report on your family meeting, discuss their responses, and share your family plan.
2. Personal and Family Preparedness. Do the following:
(a) Prepare a written plan for mobilizing your family when needed, but do not share it with anyone except your family and counselor. Include how and when a mobilization should occur, where the family should assemble, and what education or training your family should have.
(b) Using your mobilization plan from requirement 2(a) and with your family's assistance, hold a mobilization drill. After the drill, discuss with your family what went well and what could be improved. Share these findings with your counselor.
(c) Do the following:
(1) Prepare a personal emergency service pack for a mobilization call. Prepare a family emergency kit (for use in your home and another for use in your car) for a scenario in which you would have to leave your home overnight or longer.
(2) For requirement 2(c)(1), explain why the items in your personal pack and family kits are important, how to use them, and how you will maintain your kits.
(3) Show your counselor your personal emergency service pack and family emergency kits.
3. Community Preparedness. Do the following:
(a) Learn about the emergency management system of your community and its various parts: government (local, state, federal), non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and individual citizens and families.
(b) Identify the various government agencies and NGOs that would be involved in an emergency in your community. Discuss with your counselor the role of each agency.
(c) Meet with an official of an emergency management agency and discuss the community's emergency response plan and your role in it.
(d) Take a tour of an emergency management agency (e.g., emergency operations center, fire station, police station, hospital). After the tour, discuss with your counselor what you learned.
4. Emergency Service and Training. Do the following:
(a) Learn about the various emergency service organizations in your community (e.g., CERT, Medical Reserve Corps, amateur radio groups).
(b) Discuss with your counselor how you and your unit can help in an emergency.
(c) Participate in a service project with an emergency service organization. Discuss your experience with your counselor.
5. First Aid and Safety. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the importance of first aid in emergency preparedness.
(b) Demonstrate to your counselor the first aid for the following:
(1) Stopped breathing
(2) Heart attack
(3) Severe bleeding
(4) Shock
(5) Heatstroke
(6) Hypothermia
(7) Bone fractures
(8) Burns (1st, 2nd, and 3rd degree)
(9) Poisoning
(10) Choking
(c) Discuss with your counselor the importance of safety in emergency preparedness and how to prevent common injuries during an emergency.
6. Review and Reflect. Do the following:
(a) Review the requirements for the Emergency Preparedness merit badge and reflect on what you have learned.
(b) Discuss with your counselor how you can continue to be prepared for emergencies and how you can help others in your community.
